what's in here what does it do
and can i make it from scratch
it's the stuff inside your stuff
ingredients toothpaste as we
know it is relatively new only
behind 50 years old toothpaste
as we don't know it with things
like rock salt pumice crushed
eggshells crushed bone and even
crushed oyster shells this kind
of toothpaste is a lot older
5,000 years old some people say
others say only 2,500 now the
weird thing is old toothpaste
and modern toothpaste not all
that different
we have and titanium dioxide
now that is kind of a long list
but we can split it up into
different categories
first and foremost are the
abrasives abrasives are things
like sandpaper or steel wool or
Thomas abrasives literally
scrape food and other gunk like
plaque off your teeth now I'm
not gonna lie when I discovered
there were abrasives in a
toothpaste I was surprised if
you live a good long life you
will spend 2000 hours more or
less brushing your teeth imagine
sandpapering a bone for 2,000
hours you would end up with
nothing but powder but your
teeth are actually harder than
bone and iron and steel now
different manufacturers use
different abrasives in their
toothpaste but they all make up
a good chunk of the final
product anywhere between thirty
to sixty percent now the
abrasive in this toothpaste is
hydrated silica which believe it
or not is the very same thing
you find in these packets in
your luggage and vitamin bottles
except with water added now if
you ever take toothpaste and rub
it between two fingers what
you'll find is that it's not
that rough and that's for a
really simple reason it's
because your gums are a lot more
fragile than your teeth so you
don't overdo it on the roughness
of the second category is called
humectants humectant is
something that helps retain
water and that is what gives
toothpaste it's and this is a
direct quote from this
manufacturers customer service
rep smooth and carimi texture
anyway the humectants in here
are glycerin sorbitol and pro
lean glycol and two of those
molecules actually have an
additional function they are
sweet and they're not as sweet
as sugar though so most
manufacturers add some sort of
artificial sweetener on top
would be something like
saccharine in here or xylitol in
here now none of those
artificial sweeteners break down
to form acids like sugar does so
that's why they don't cause
cavities and you can use them in
toothpaste and then of course
there are flavors which are
there to make the toothpaste
taste not awful in your mouth
feel clean now in our case and
almost every case you will find
flavorings super precisely
described as flavor so that
manufacturers can't steal each
other's corporate secrets
okay so we got abrasives
humectants sweeteners and
flavorings next up filming ages
just like you find in soap or
shampoo except here there's just
one sodium lauryl sulfate sls as
it's called in the business
thumbs up real nice when you
brush real some people say that
all this foam trap some of the
gunk that the abrasive scrape
off your teeth that's chemically
not unreasonable but I think the
reason that most modern
toothpaste have all those
foaming agents is because you
really feel good making the
phone like you're doing
something you are cleaning your
teeth now you can actually buy
non foaming toothpaste if you
want
ok so the next category is
thickeners and binders which
keep your toothpaste from
becoming a running watery
disgusting mess or separating
out like natural peanut butter
so the ones that we have in this
toothpaste are cellulose gum and
carriage and which come from
trees and red seaweed
respectively
ok so we are finally at the last
three ingredients please don't
really fit into categories right
so first there's sodium fluoride
which is in almost every
toothpaste manufactured today
and prevents cavities
next up is sodium hydroxide
which pumps the ph up you don't
really want to be brushing your
teeth with acid
finally there's titanium dioxide
which makes your toothpaste
white without it would be like a
dull gray and no one wants that
so now that we figured out
what's in toothpaste and how it
works
I'm gonna try and make my own
from scratch using only natural
ingredients first I need a
massive my bracelet has to not
dissolve in water because it
dissolves in water then it's no
longer a solid and can't rub
stuff off my teeth and I'm gonna
use something that you can find
in rocks all over nature calcium
carbonate otherwise known as
chalk and because i don't want
my toothpaste to taste horrible
i'm going to use xylitol as a
sweetener and peppermint oil as
a flavoring I've also got
glycerin this is my humectants
going to keep everything nice
and moist and all three of these
they come from plants
I'm not gonna bother with sodium
fluoride because i'm not going
to use this to face for the rest
of my life and I'm also not
gonna bother with sodium lauryl
sulfate the foaming agent
because i really care of this
foams up
don't let's just do this see
what happens
yeah
okay here we go
I guess I just
that's about right right here we
go
how bad it tastes cum tastes
like vaguely rocky toothpaste is
honestly what it tastes like
there's there's a little bit of
peppermint there's some
sweetness and then it tastes
like Earth not like dirt but
like like minerals not bad i
would give this a solid seven
out of ten i mean i'll probably
never use it again but seven out
of ten nonetheless if you guys
have ideas on how to improve the
recipe or if you have an idea
for an episode let me know in
the comments or hit me up on
Twitter until then